74. Our third kartavya aligns with our vision of Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas towards a Viksit Bharat.

75. This requires targeted efforts for a) Increasing farmer incomes through productivity enhancement and entrepreneurship, with special attention to small and marginal farmers; b) Empowering Divyangjan through access to livelihood opportunities, training and
    high-quality assistive devices; c) Empowering the vulnerable to access mental health and trauma care; d) Focus on the Purvodaya States and the North-East Region to accelerate development and employment opportunities.

Increasing Farmer Incomes

76. Fisheries: We will undertake initiatives (i) for integrated development of 500 reservoirs and Amrit Sarovars
    (ii) strengthen the fisheries value chain in coastal areas and enable market linkages involving start-ups and women-led groups together with Fish Farmers Producer Organisations.

77. Animal Husbandry: To provide quality employment opportunities in rural and peri-urban areas, we will support the Animal Husbandry Sector in entrepreneurship development through: (a) a Credit-Linked Subsidy Programme (b) scaling-up and modernisation of livestock enterprises (c) enhance creation of livestock, dairy and poultry-focused integrated-value chains and (d) encourage creation of Livestock Farmer Producers Organisations.

78. High Value Agriculture: To diversify farm outputs, increase productivity, enhance farmers’ incomes, and create new employment opportunities, we will support high value crops such as coconut, sandalwood, cocoa and cashew in our coastal areas. Agar trees in North East and nuts such as, almonds, walnuts and pine nuts in our hilly regions will also be supported.

79. India is the world’s largest producer of coconuts.
    About 30 million people, including nearly 10 million farmers, depend on coconuts for their livelihood. To further enhance competitiveness in coconut production, I propose a Coconut Promotion Scheme to increase production and enhance productivity through various interventions including replacing old and non-productive trees with new saplings/plants/varieties in major coconut growing States.

80. A dedicated programme is proposed for Indian cashew and cocoa to make India self-reliant in raw cashew and cocoa production and processing, enhance export competitiveness and transform Indian Cashew and Indian Cocoa into premium global brands by 2030.

81. Sandalwood is closely linked to India’s social and cultural heritage. Our Government will partner with State Governments to promote focused cultivation and post-harvest processing to restore the glory of the Indian Sandalwood ecosystem.

82. To rejuvenate old, low-yielding orchards and expand
    high-density cultivation of walnuts, almonds and pine nuts, we will support a dedicated programme to enhance farmer incomes and in bringing value addition by engaging youth.

Bharat-VISTAAR (Virtually Integrated System to Access Agricultural Resources)

83. I propose to launch Bharat-VISTAAR—a multilingual AI tool that shall integrate the AgriStack portals and the ICAR package on agricultural practices with AI systems. This will enhance farm productivity, enable better decisions for farmers and reduce risk by providing customised advisory support.

SHE-Marts for Rural Women-led Enterprises
