Financial Sector

41. The Indian banking sector today is characterised by strong balance sheets, historic highs in profitability, improved asset quality and coverage exceeding 98% of villages in the country. At this juncture, we are well-placed to futuristically evaluate the measures needed to continue on the path of reform-led growth of this sector.

42. I propose setting up a “High Level Committee on Banking for Viksit Bharat”, to comprehensively review the sector and align it with India’s next phase of growth, while safeguarding financial stability, inclusion and consumer protection.

43. The vision for NBFCs for Viksit Bharat has been outlined with clear targets for credit disbursement and technology adoption. In order to achieve scale and improve efficiency in the Public Sector NBFCs, as a first step, it is proposed to restructure the Power Finance Corporation and Rural Electrification Corporation.

44. I propose a comprehensive review of the Foreign Exchange Management (Non-debt Instruments) Rules to create a more contemporary, user-friendly framework for foreign investments, consistent with India’s evolving economic priorities.

Corporate Bond Market

45. I propose to introduce a market making framework with suitable access to funds and derivatives on corporate bond indices. I also propose to introduce total return swaps on corporate bonds.

Municipal Bonds

46. To encourage the issuance of municipal bonds of higher value by large cities, I propose an incentive of ₹100 crore for a single bond issuance of more than ₹1000 crore. The current scheme under AMRUT which incentivises issuances up to ₹200 crore, will also continue to support smaller and medium towns.

Ease of Doing Business

47. Individual Persons Resident Outside India (PROI) will be permitted to invest in equity instruments of listed Indian companies through the Portfolio Investment Scheme. It is also proposed to increase the investment limit for an individual PROI under this scheme from 5% to 10%, with an overall investment limit for all
    individual PROIs to 24%, from the current 10%.

Emerging technologies, including AI

48. 21^(st) Century is technology driven. Adoption of technology is for the benefit of all people - farmers in the field, women in STEM, youth keen to upskill and Divyangjan to access newer opportunities. The Government has taken several steps to support new technologies through AI Mission, National Quantum Mission, Anusandhan National Research Fund, and Research, Development and Innovation Fund.
