Infrastructure

32. During this past decade our Government has undertaken several initiatives for large-scale enhancement of public infrastructure including through new financing instruments such as Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InVITs) and Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) and institutions like NIIF and NABFID. We shall continue to focus on developing infrastructure in cities with over 5 lakh population (Tier II and Tier III), which have expanded to become growth centres.

33. Public capex has increased manifold from ₹2 lakh crore in
    FY2014-15 to an allocation of ₹11.2 lakh crore in
    BE 2025-26. In FY2026-27, I propose to increase it to ₹12.2 lakh crore to continue the momentum.

34. To strengthen the confidence of private developers regarding risks during infrastructure development and construction phase, I propose to set up an Infrastructure Risk Guarantee Fund to provide prudently calibrated partial credit guarantees to lenders.

35. Over the years, REITs have emerged as a successful instrument for asset monetisation. I propose to accelerate recycling of significant real estate assets of CPSEs through the setting up of dedicated REITs.

36. To promote environmentally sustainable movement of cargo, I propose to: a) Establish new Dedicated Freight Corridors connecting Dankuni in the East, to Surat in the West; b) operationalise 20 new National Waterways (NW) over next 5 years, starting with NW-5 in Odisha to connect mineral rich areas of Talcher and Angul and industrial centres like Kalinga Nagar to the Ports of Paradeep and Dhamra. Training Institutes will be set up as Regional Centres of Excellence for development of the required manpower. This will benefit youth in the entire stretch of the waterways to train and acquire skills.
    Further, a ship repair ecosystem catering to inland waterways will also be set up at Varanasi and Patna; c) launch a Coastal Cargo Promotion Scheme for incentivising a modal shift from rail and road, to increase the share of inland waterways and coastal shipping from 6 % to 12 % by 2047.

37. To enhance last-mile and remote connectivity, and promote tourism, I propose to give incentives to indigenize manufacturing of seaplanes. A Seaplane VGF Scheme will be also be introduced to provide support for operations.

Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage (CCUS)

38. Aligning with the roadmap launched in December 2025, CCUS technologies at scale will achieve higher readiness levels in end-use applications across five industrial sectors, including, power, steel, cement, refineries and chemicals. An outlay of ₹20,000 crore is proposed over the next 5 years.

City Economic Regions

39. Cities are India’s engines of growth, innovation, and opportunities. We shall now focus on Tier II and Tier III cities, and even temple-towns, which need modern infrastructure and basic amenities. This Budget aims to further amplify the potential of cities to deliver the economic power of agglomerations by mapping city economic regions (CER), based on their specific growth drivers. An allocation of ₹ 5000 crore per CER over 5 years is proposed for implementing their plans through a challenge mode with a reform-cum-results based financing mechanism.

40. In order to promote environmentally sustainable passenger systems, we will develop seven High-Speed Rail corridors between cities as ‘growth connectors’, namely i) Mumbai-Pune, ii) Pune-Hyderabad, iii) Hyderabad-Bengaluru, iv) Hyderabad-Chennai, v) Chennai-Bengaluru, vi) Delhi-Varanasi, vii) Varanasi-Siliguri.
