Budget 2026-2027

Speech of

Nirmala Sitharaman

Minister of Finance

February 1, 2026

Hon’ble Speaker,

On the sacred occasion of Magha Purnima and the birth anniversary of Guru Ravidas, I present the Budget for the year 2026-2027.

Introduction

1.  Since we assumed office 12 years ago, India’s economic trajectory has been marked by stability, fiscal discipline, sustained growth and moderate inflation. This is the result of conscious choices we have made, even in times of heightened uncertainty and disruption. Our Government, led by Hon’ble Prime Minister Modi, has decisively and consistently chosen action over ambivalence, reform over rhetoric and people over populism.

2.  We have pursued far reaching structural reforms,
    fiscal prudence and monetary stability whilst
    maintaining a strong thrust on public investment.
    Keeping atmanirbharta as a lodestar, we have built domestic manufacturing capacity, energy security and reduced critical import dependencies. Simultaneously, we have ensured that citizens benefit from every action of the Government, undertaking reforms to support employment generation, agricultural productivity, household purchasing power and universal services to people.
    These measures have delivered a high growth rate of around 7% and helped us make substantial strides in poverty reduction and improvement in the lives of our people.

3.  Today, we face an external environment in which trade and multilateralism are imperilled and access to resources and supply chains are disrupted. New technologies are transforming production systems while sharply increasing demands on water, energy and critical minerals.

4.  India will continue to take confident steps towards Viksit Bharat, balancing ambition with inclusion. As a growing economy with expanding trade and capital needs, India must also remain deeply integrated with global markets, exporting more and attracting stable long-term investment.

Part A

5.  As I begin Part A, I want to express my gratitude to the people for standing firmly with us as we forge our way together towards becoming one of the largest economies of the world.

6.  Our aim is to transform aspiration into achievement and potential into performance, as we ensure that the dividends of growth reach every farmer, the scheduled caste, the scheduled tribes, the nomads, the youth, the poor and the women.

7.  In the Viksit Bharat Young Leaders Dialogue 2026, several innovative ideas were shared with our Prime Minister, which have inspired many of the proposals, making this a unique Yuva Shakti-driven Budget.

8.  Our Government’s ‘Sankalp’ is to focus on our poor, underprivileged and the disadvantaged. To deliver on this Sankalp, and given that this is the first Budget prepared in Kartavya Bhawan, we are inspired by 3 kartavya:

9.  Our first kartavya is to accelerate and sustain economic growth, by enhancing productivity and competitiveness, and building resilience to volatile global dynamics.

10. Our second kartavya is to fulfil aspirations of our people and build their capacity, making them strong partners in India’s path to prosperity.

11. Our third kartavya, aligned with our vision of Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas, is to ensure that every family, community, region and sector has access to resources, amenities and opportunities for meaningful participation.

12. This threefold approach requires a supportive ecosystem. The first requirement is to sustain the momentum of structural reforms— continuous, adaptive, and forward-looking. Second, a robust and resilient financial sector is central to mobilising savings, allocating capital efficiently and managing risks. Third, cutting-edge technologies, including AI applications, can serve as force multipliers for better governance.

Reform Express

13. Our Government has undertaken comprehensive economic reforms towards creating employment, boosting productivity and accelerating growth. After the Prime Minister’s announcement on Independence Day in 2025, over 350 reforms have been rolled out. These include GST simplification, notification of Labour Codes, and rationalisation of mandatory Quality Control Orders. High Level Committees have been formed and in parallel, the Central Government is working with the State Governments on deregulation and reducing compliance requirements.

14. The Reform Express is well on its way and will maintain its momentum to help us fulfil our kartavya.

I now move to the specific proposals.

15. Under our first kartavya to accelerate and sustain economic growth, I propose interventions in six areas: i) Scaling up manufacturing in 7 strategic and frontier sectors; ii) Rejuvenating legacy industrial sectors; iii) Creating “Champion MSMEs”; iv) Delivering a powerful push to Infrastructure; v) Ensuring long-term energy security and stability; and vi) Developing City Economic Regions.
