Scaling up manufacturing in 7 strategic and frontier sectors:

16. Biopharma SHAKTI (Strategy for Healthcare Advancement through Knowledge, Technology and Innovation) – India’s disease burden is observed to be shifting towards non-communicable diseases, like diabetes, cancer and autoimmune disorders. Biologic medicines are key to longevity and quality of life at affordable costs. To develop India as a global Biopharma manufacturing hub, I propose the Biopharma SHAKTI with an outlay of ₹ 10,000 crores over the next 5 years. This will build the ecosystem for domestic production of biologics and biosimilars. The Strategy will include a Biopharma-focused network with 3 new National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) and upgrading 7 existing ones. It will also create a network of over 1000 accredited India Clinical Trials sites. We propose to strengthen the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation to meet global standards and approval timeframes through a dedicated scientific review cadre and specialists.

17. India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 1.0 expanded India’s semiconductor sector capabilities. Building on this,
    we will launch ISM 2.0 to produce equipment and materials, design full-stack Indian IP, and fortify supply chains. We will also focus on industry-led research and training centres to develop technology and skilled workforce.

18. The Electronics Components Manufacturing Scheme, launched in April 2025 with an outlay of ₹22,919 crore, already has investment commitments at double the target. We propose to increase the outlay to ₹40,000 crore to capitalise on the momentum.

19. A Scheme for Rare Earth Permanent Magnets was launched in November 2025. We now propose to support the mineral-rich States of Odisha, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu to establish dedicated Rare Earth Corridors to promote mining, processing, research and manufacturing.

20. To enhance domestic chemical production and reduce import-dependency, we will launch a Scheme to support States in establishing 3 dedicated Chemical Parks, through challenge route, on a cluster-based plug-and-play model.

21. Strong capital goods capability is a determinant of productivity and quality across different sectors. Towards building this capacity, I propose the following:

(a) Hi-Tech Tool Rooms will be established by CPSEs at 2 locations as digitally enabled automated service bureaus that locally design, test, and manufacture high-precision components at scale and at lower cost.

(b) A Scheme for Enhancement of Construction and Infrastructure Equipment (CIE) will be introduced to strengthen domestic manufacturing of high-value and technologically-advanced CIE. This can range from lifts in a multi-story apartment, fire-fighting equipment, large and small, to tunnel-boring equipment for building metros and high-altitude roads.

(c) I also propose a Scheme for Container Manufacturing to create a globally competitive container manufacturing ecosystem, with a budgetary allocation of ₹10,000 crore over a 5 year period.
