Cooperatives

121. Deduction is already allowed to a primary cooperative society engaged in supplying milk, oilseeds, fruits or vegetables raised or grown by its members. I propose to extend this deduction to also include supply of cattle feed and cotton seed produced by its members.

122. I propose to allow inter-cooperative society dividend income as deduction under the new tax regime to the extent it is further distributed to its members.

123. I further propose to allow exemption for a period
     of 3 years, to dividend income received by a notified national co-operative federation, on their investments made in companies up to 31.1.2026. This exemption would be allowed only for dividends further distributed to its member co-operatives.

Supporting IT sector as India’s growth engine

124. India is a global leader in software development services, IT enabled services, knowledge process outsourcing services and contract R&D services relating to software development. These business segments are quite inter-connected with each other.

125. All these services are proposed to be clubbed under a single category of Information Technology Services
     with a common safe harbour margin of 15.5 percent applicable to all.

126. The threshold for availing safe harbour for IT services is being enhanced substantially from 300 crore rupees to 2,000 crore rupees.

127. Safe harbour for IT services shall be approved by an automated rule-driven process without any need for tax officer to examine and accept the application. Once applied by an IT Services company, the same safe harbour can be continued for a period of 5 years at a stretch at its choice.

128. For IT services companies who want to conclude Advance Pricing Agreement (APA), I propose to fast track Unilateral APA process for IT services and endeavour to conclude it within a period of 2 years. The period of 2 years can be extended by a further period of 6 months on taxpayer’s request.

129. I propose to extend the facility of modified returns available to the entity entering APA to its associated entities also.

Attracting global business and investment

130. Recognising the need to enable critical infrastructure and boost investment in data centres, I propose to provide tax holiday till 2047 to any foreign company that provides cloud services to customers globally by using data centre services from India. It will, however, need to provide services to Indian customers through an Indian reseller entity.

131. I also propose to provide a safe harbour of 15 percent on cost in case the company providing data centre services from India is a related entity.

132. To harness the efficiency of just-in-time logistics for electronic manufacturing, I propose to provide safe harbour to non-residents for component warehousing in a bonded warehouse at a profit margin of 2 percent of the invoice value. The resultant tax of about 0.7 percent will be much lower than in competing jurisdictions.

133. To provide fillip to toll manufacturing in India,
     I propose to provide exemption from income tax
     for 5 years, to any non-resident who provides capital goods, equipment or tooling, to any toll manufacturer in a bonded zone.

134. To encourage vast pool of global talent to work in India for a longer period of time, I propose to provide exemption to global (non-India sourced) income of a non-resident expert, for a stay period of 5 years under notified schemes.

135. I propose to provide exemption from Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) to all non-residents who pay tax on presumptive basis.

Tax administration

136. I propose to constitute a Joint Committee of Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Central Board of Direct Taxes for incorporating the requirements of Income Computation and Disclosure Standards (ICDS) in the Indian Accounting Standards (IndAS) itself. Separate accounting requirement based on ICDS will be done away with from the tax year 2027-28.

137. To support PM Modi’s vision of home-grown accounting and advisory firms to become global leaders, I propose to rationalise the definition of accountant for the purposes of Safe Harbour Rules.

Other Tax proposals

138. Change in taxation of buyback was brought in to address the improper use of buyback route by promoters. In the interest of minority shareholders, I propose to tax buyback for all types of shareholders as Capital Gains. However, to disincentivize misuse of tax arbitrage, promoters will pay an additional buyback tax. This will make effective tax 22 percent for corporate promoters. For non-corporate promoters the effective tax will be 30 percent.

139. TCS rate for sellers of specific goods namely alcoholic liquor, scrap and minerals will be rationalized to 2 percent and that on tendu leaves will be reduced from 5 percent to 2 percent.

140. I propose to raise the STT on Futures to 0.05 percent from present 0.02 percent. STT on options premium and exercise of options are both proposed to be raised to 0.15 percent from the present rate of 0.1 percent and 0.125 percent respectively.

141. We reformed the taxation landscape for corporates in 2019 by providing them a simplified regime with lower tax rate so that they could productively focus on business rather than on claim of deductions and exemptions.

142. To encourage companies to shift to the new regime, set-off of brought forward MAT credit is proposed to be allowed to companies only in the new regime. Set-off using available MAT credit is proposed to be allowed to an extent of 1/4^(th) of the tax liability in the new regime.

143. MAT is proposed to be made final tax. So, there will be no further credit accumulation from 1^(st) April 2026.
     In line with this change, the rate of final tax is being reduced to 14 percent from the current MAT rate
     of 15 percent. The brought forward MAT credit of taxpayers accumulated till 31^(st) March 2026, will continue to be available to them for set-off as above.
