Energy transition and security

150. I propose to extend the basic customs duty exemption given to capital goods used for manufacturing Lithium-Ion Cells for batteries, to those used for manufacturing Lithium-Ion Cells for battery energy storage systems too.

151. I propose to exempt basic customs duty on import of sodium antimonate for use in manufacture of solar glass.

Nuclear Power

152. I propose to extend the existing basic customs duty exemption on imports of goods required for Nuclear Power Projects till the year 2035 and expand it for all nuclear plants irrespective of their capacity.

Critical Minerals

153. It is proposed to provide basic customs duty exemption to the import of capital goods required for processing of critical minerals in India.

Biogas blended CNG

154. I propose to exclude the entire value of biogas
     while calculating the Central Excise duty payable on biogas blended CNG.

Civil and Defence Aviation

155. I propose to exempt basic customs duty on components and parts required for the manufacture of civilian, training and other aircrafts.

156. It is proposed to exempt basic customs duty on raw materials imported for manufacture of parts of aircraft to be used in maintenance, repair, or overhaul requirements by Units in the Defence sector.

Electronics

157. To deepen value addition in the consumer electronics sector, I propose to exempt basic customs duty on specified parts used in the manufacture of microwave ovens.

Special Economic Zone

158. To address the concerns arising about utilization of capacities by manufacturing units in the Special Economic Zones due to global trade disruptions, I propose, as a special one-time measure, to facilitate sales by eligible manufacturing units in SEZs to the Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) at concessional rates of duty. The quantity of such sales will be limited to a prescribed proportion of their exports. Necessary regulatory changes will be undertaken to operationalise these measures while ensuring level-playing field for the units working in the DTA.
