Ease of Living

159. To rationalize the customs duty structure for goods imported for personal use, I propose to reduce the tariff rate on all dutiable goods imported for personal use from 20 per cent to 10 per cent.

160. To provide relief to patients, particularly those suffering from cancer, I propose to exempt basic customs duty on 17 drugs or medicines.

161. I also propose to ⁠add 7 more rare diseases for the purposes of exempting import duties on personal imports of drugs, medicines and Food for Special Medical Purposes (FSMP) used in their treatment.

Customs Process

162. India's role and share in global trade is poised for a major leap, in line with our ambition and journey towards 'Viksit Bharat'. In this regard, I propose many measures for custom processes to have minimal intervention for smoother and faster movement of goods and greater certainty to the trade.

Trust-based systems

163. I propose to enhance duty deferral period for
     Tier 2 and Tier 3 Authorised Economic Operators, known as AEOs, from 15 days to 30 days.

164. I propose to provide eligible manufacturer-importers the same duty deferral facility. This should encourage them to get themselves accredited as a full-fledged Tier 3- AEO in due course.

165. To provide greater certainty and for better business planning, I propose to extend validity period of advance ruling, binding on Customs, from the present 3 years to 5 years.

166. In the spirit of whole-of-the-government approach, Government agencies will be encouraged to leverage AEO accreditation for preferential treatment in clearing their cargo.

167. Regular importers with trusted longstanding supply chains will be recognized in the risk system, so that the need for verification of their cargo every time can be minimized. Export cargo using electronic sealing will be provided through clearance from the factory premises to the ship.

168. For import of goods not needing any compliance, filing of bill of entry by a trusted importer, and arrival of goods will automatically notify Customs for completing their clearance formalities. This will enable goods to be released immediately on arrival.

169. The Customs warehousing framework will be transformed into a warehouse operator-centric system with self-declarations, electronic tracking and risk-based audit. These reforms will move away from the current system of officer-dependent approvals, and reduce transaction delays and compliance costs.

Ease of Doing Business

170. Approvals required for cargo clearance from various Government agencies will be seamlessly processed through a single and interconnected digital window by the end of the financial year. Processes involved in clearance of food, drugs, plant, animal & wild life products, accounting for around 70 percent of interdicted cargo, will be operationalised on this system by April 2026 itself.

171. For goods not having any compliance requirement, clearance will be done by Customs immediately after online registration is completed by the importer, subject to the payment of duty.

172. Customs Integrated System (CIS) will be rolled out
     in 2 years as a single, integrated and scalable platform for all the customs processes.

173. Utilization of non-intrusive scanning with advanced imaging and AI technology for risk assessment will be expanded in a phased manner with the objective to scan every container across all the major ports.

New export opportunities

174. To support Indian fishermen to fully harness the economic value of marine resources beyond our territorial waters, the following measures will be taken.

     a.  Fish catch by an Indian fishing vessel in Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) or on the High Seas will be made free of duty.

     b.  Landing of such fish on foreign port will be treated as export of goods.

Safeguards will be put in place to prevent misuse during fish catch, transit and transshipment.

175. To support aspirations of India’s small businesses, artisans and start-ups to access global markets through e-commerce, I am pleased to announce complete removal of the current value cap of ₹10 lakh per consignment on courier exports. In addition, handling of rejected and returned consignments will be improved with effective use of technology for identifying such consignments.

Ease of Living

176. I propose to revise provisions governing baggage clearance during international travel to address genuine concerns of passengers. The revised rules will enhance duty-free allowances in line with the present-day travel realities and provide clarity in temporary carriage of goods brought in or taken out.

177. There are honest taxpayers who are willing to settle disputes by paying all their dues. But they get deterred due to negative connotation associated with penalty. They will now be able close cases by paying an additional amount in lieu of penalty.

Honourable Speaker Sir, with this, I commend the Budget to this august House.

Jai Hind!
