PART B

Direct Taxes

Speaker Sir,

98. Now I present my proposals on Direct Taxes.

New Income Tax Act

99. In July 2024, I announced a comprehensive review of the Income Tax Act, 1961. This was completed in a record time and the Income Tax Act, 2025 will come into effect from 1^(st) April, 2026.

100. The simplified Income Tax Rules and Forms will be notified shortly, giving adequate time to taxpayers to acquaint themselves with its requirements.

101. The forms have been redesigned such that ordinary citizens can comply without difficulty.

Ease of Living

102. I propose that any interest awarded by the
     Motor Accident Claims Tribunal to a natural person will be exempt from Income Tax, and any TDS on this account will be done away with.

103. I propose to reduce TCS rate on the sale of overseas tour program package from the current 5 percent
     and 20 percent to 2 percent without any stipulation of amount.

104. I propose to reduce TCS rate for pursuing education and for medical purposes under the Liberalized Remittance Scheme (LRS) from 5 percent to 2 percent.

105. Supply of manpower services is proposed to be specifically brought within the ambit of payment to contractors for the purpose of TDS to avoid ambiguity. Thus, TDS on these services will be at the rate of either 1 percent or 2 percent only.

106. I propose a scheme for small taxpayers wherein
     a rule-based automated process will enable obtaining a lower or nil deduction certificate instead of filing an application with the assessing officer.

107. For the ease of taxpayers holding securities in multiple companies, I propose to enable depositories to accept Form 15G or Form 15H from the investor and provide it directly to various relevant companies.

108. I propose to extend time available for revising returns from 31^(st) December to up to 31^(st) March with the payment of a nominal fee.

109. I also propose to stagger the timeline for filing of tax returns. Individuals with ITR 1 and ITR 2 returns will continue to file till 31^(st) July and non-audit business cases or trusts are proposed to be allowed timetill 31^(st) August.

110. TDS on the sale of immovable property by a
     non-resident is proposed to be deducted and deposited through resident buyer’s PAN based challan instead of requiring TAN.

111. To address practical issues of small taxpayers like students, young professionals, tech employees, relocated NRIs, and such others, I propose to introduce a one-time 6-month foreign asset disclosure scheme for these taxpayers to disclose income or assets below a certain size.

112. This scheme would be applicable for two categories of taxpayers namely,

(A) who did not disclose their overseas income or asset and

(B) who disclosed their overseas income and/or paid due tax, but could not declare the asset acquired.

For category (A), the limit of undisclosed income/asset is proposed to be up to 1 crore rupees. They need to pay 30 percent of Fair Market Value of asset or 30 percent of undisclosed income as tax and 30 percent as additional income tax in lieu of penalty and would thereby get immunity from prosecution.

For category (B), asset value is proposed to be
up to 5 crore rupees. Here, immunity from both penalty and prosecution will be available with the payment of fee
of 1 lakh rupees.

Rationalizing Penalty and Prosecution

113. Multiplicity of proceedings are a hindrance to the ease of doing business. I propose to integrate assessment & penalty proceedings by way of a common order for both. There will be no interest liability on the taxpayer on the penalty amount for the period of appeal before the first appellate authority irrespective of the outcome of appeal process. Further, quantum of pre-payment is being reduced from 20 percent to 10 percent and will continue to be calculated only on core tax demand.

114. As an additional measure for reducing litigation,
     I propose to allow taxpayers to update their returns even after reassessment proceedings have been initiated, at an additional 10 percent tax rate over and above the rate applicable for the relevant year. The assessing officer will then use only this updated return in his proceedings.

115. There is already a framework for immunity from penalty and prosecution in the cases of underreporting. I propose to apply this framework of immunity to misreporting too. However, in such a case the taxpayer will need to pay 100 percent of the tax amount as an additional income tax over and above the tax and interest due.

116. Penalties for certain technical defaults such as failure to get accounts audited, non-furnishing of transfer pricing audit report and default in furnishing statement for financial transactions, are proposed to be converted into fee.

117. I propose to rationalise prosecution framework under the Income Tax Act while maintaining a careful balance for deterrence in some serious offences.

118. Non-production of books of account and documents, and requirement of TDS payment, where payment is made in kind, are being decriminalised. Further, minor offences will attract fine only.

119. The remaining prosecutions will be graded commensurate with the quantum of offence. They will entail only simple imprisonment, with maximum imprisonment reduced to two years, and power to courts to convert even those into fine.

120. There is no penalty presently for non-disclosure of non-immovable foreign assets with aggregate value less than 20 lakh rupees. I propose to also provide them with immunity from prosecution with retrospective effect from 1.10.2024.
