65. The Tourism sector has the potential to play a large role in employment generation, forex earnings and expanding the local economy.

66. I propose to set up a National Institute of Hospitality by upgrading the existing National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology. It will function as a bridge between academia, industry and the Government.

67. I also propose a pilot scheme for upskilling 10,000 guides in 20 iconic tourist sites through a standardized,
    high-quality 12-week training course in hybrid mode, in collaboration with an Indian Institute of Management.

68. A National Destination Digital Knowledge Grid will be established to digitally document all places of significance—cultural, spiritual and heritage. This initiative will create a new ecosystem of jobs for local researchers, historians, content creators and technology partners.

69. India has the potential and opportunity to offer world-class trekking and hiking experience. We will develop ecologically sustainable (i) Mountain trails in Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu and Kashmir; Araku Valley in the Eastern Ghats and Podhigai Malai in the Western Ghats. (ii) Turtle Trails along key nesting sites in the coastal areas of Odisha, Karnataka and Kerala; and (iii) Bird watching trails along the Pulikat lake in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.

70. Under the visionary leadership of Honorable Prime Minister, we established the International Big Cat Alliance in 2024. This year, India is hosting the first ever Global Big Cat Summit, where heads of governments and ministers from 95 range countries will deliberate on collective strategies for conservation.

Heritage and Culture Tourism

71. I propose to develop 15 archeological sites including Lothal, Dholavira, Rakhigarhi, Adichanallur, Sarnath, Hastinapur, and Leh Palace into vibrant, experiential cultural destinations. Excavated landscapes will be opened to the public through curated walkways.
    Immersive storytelling skills and technologies will be introduced to help conservation labs, interpretation centres, and guides.

Sports

72. The Sports Sector provides multiple means of employment, skilling and job opportunities. Taking forward the systematic nurturing of sports talent which is set in motion through the Khelo India
    programme, I propose to launch a Khelo India Mission to transform the Sports sector over the next decade.

73. The Mission will facilitate: a) An integrated talent development pathway, supported by training centres (foundational, intermediate and elite levels); b) systematic development of coaches and support staff; c) integration of sports science and technology; d) competitions and leagues to promote sports culture and provide platforms; and, e) development of sports infrastructure for training and competition.
