84. Building on the success of the Lakhpati Didi Programme, I propose to help women take the next step from
    credit-led livelihoods to being owners of enterprises.
    Self-Help Entrepreneur (SHE) Marts will be set up as community-owned retail outlets within the cluster level federations through enhanced and innovative financing instruments.

Empowering Divyangjan

85. Divyangjan Kaushal Yojana: IT, AVGC sectors, Hospitality and Food and Beverages sectors offer task-oriented and process-driven roles, which are suitable for Divyangjans. We will ensure dignified livelihood opportunities through industry-relevant and customized training specific to each divyang group.

86. Divyang Sahara Yojana: Timely access to high-quality assistive devices for all eligible Divyangjans is a fundamental need. I propose to (i) support the Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India (ALIMCO) to scale up production of assistive devices, invest in R&D and AI integration, (ii) strengthen PM Divyasha Kendras and support setting up of Assistive Technology Marts as modern retail-style centres where Divyangjans and senior citizens can see, try and purchase assistive products.

Reaffirming our commitment to Mental Health and Trauma Care

87. There are no national institutes for mental healthcare in north India. We will therefore set up a NIMHANS-2 and also upgrade National Mental Health Institutes in Ranchi and Tezpur as Regional Apex Institutions.

88. Emergencies expose families, particularly the poor and vulnerable, to unexpected expenditure. We will strengthen and increase these capacities by 50% in District Hospitals by establishing Emergency and Trauma Care Centres.

Focus on the Purvodaya States and the North-Eastern Region

89. Purvodaya: I propose the development of an integrated East Coast Industrial Corridor with a well-connected node at Durgapur, creation of 5 tourism destinations in the 5 Purvodaya States, and the provision of 4,000 e-buses.

90. Buddhist Sites in North-Eastern Region: The
    North-Eastern Region is a civilizational confluence of Theravada and Mahayana/Vajrayana traditions. I propose to launch a Scheme for Development of Buddhist Circuits in Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Assam, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura. The Scheme will cover preservation of temples and monasteries, pilgrimage interpretation centers, connectivity and pilgrim amenities.

16^(th) Finance Commission
