49. Our second kartavya is to fulfil aspirations and build capacity. Close to 25 crore individuals have come out of multidimensional poverty through a decade of our Government’s sustained and reform-oriented efforts.

50. Our Government has therefore decided to place a renewed emphasis on the Services Sector to provide a pathway to fulfilling aspirations of a youthful India, with the following measures.

High-Powered ‘Education to Employment and Enterprise’ Standing Committee

51. I propose to set up a High-Powered ‘Education to Employment and Enterprise’ Standing Committee to recommend measures that focus on the Services Sector as a core driver of Viksit Bharat. This will make us a global leader in services, with a 10% global share by 2047. The Committee will prioritise areas to optimise the potential for growth, employment and exports. They will also assess the impact of emerging technologies, including AI, on jobs and skill requirements and propose measures thereof.

Creation of Professionals for Viksit Bharat

52. To create a new range of skilled career pathways for our youth, I propose interventions in the following sectors:

Health

53. Existing institutions for Allied Health Professionals (AHPs) will be upgraded and new AHP Institutions established in private and Government sectors. This will cover 10 selected disciplines, including optometry, radiology, anesthesia, OT Technology, Applied Psychology and Behavioural Health and add 100,000 AHPs over the
    next 5 years.

54. A strong Care Ecosystem, covering geriatric and allied care services will be built. A variety of NSQF-aligned programmes will be developed to train multiskilled caregivers combining core care and allied skills, such as, wellness, yoga and operation of medical and assistive devices. In the coming year, 1.5 lakh caregivers will be trained.

Hubs for Medical Value Tourism

55. To promote India as a hub for medical tourism
    services, I propose to launch a Scheme to support States in establishing five Regional Medical Hubs, in partnership with the private sector. These Hubs will serve as integrated healthcare complexes that combine medical, educational and research facilities. They will have AYUSH Centres, Medical Value Tourism Facilitation Centres and infrastructure for diagnostics, post-care and rehabilitation. These Hubs will provide diverse job opportunities for health professionals including doctors and AHPs.

AYUSH

56. Ancient Indian yoga, already respected in several parts of the world, was given mass global recognition when Hon’ble PM took it to the UN. Post-COVID, Ayurveda gained a similar global acceptance and recognition.

57. Exporting quality Ayurvedic products helps farmers who grow the herbs and the youth who process the products. To meet growing global demand, a few more steps are being taken.

58. I propose to (i) set up 3 new All India Institutes of Ayurveda; (ii) upgrade AYUSH pharmacies and Drug Testing Labs for higher standards of certification ecosystem, and make available more skilled personnel; (iii) upgrade the WHO Global Traditional Medicine Centre in Jamnagar to bolster evidence-based research, training and awareness for traditional medicine.

Animal Husbandry
